[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that
[Amit Varma]: Parsis in Mumbai instead of being left at the Tower of Silence after they die are now cremated and why because a cow fell
[Amit Varma]: sick in the early 1990s
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that the smog in Delhi is caused by something that farmers in Punjab do and that there's no way to stop them?
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that there wasn't one gas tragedy in Gopal but three?
[Amit Varma]: One of them was seen but two were unseen. Did you know that many well-intentioned government policies hurt the people?
[Amit Varma]: They're supposed to help
[Amit Varma]: Why was demonetization a bad idea? How should GST have been implemented?
[Amit Varma]: Why are all our politicians so corrupt when not all of them are bad people?
[Amit Varma]: I'm Amit Verma and in my weekly podcast the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: I take a shot at answering all these questions and many more
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private action
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on economics political philosophy cognitive neuroscience and constitutional law
[Amit Varma]: So that the insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours the seen and the unseen releases every Monday
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at seen unseen dot I n you can also
[Amit Varma]: Subscribe to the seen and the unseen on whatever podcast app you happen to prefer
[Amit Varma]: How did we communicate with each other before the internet? Were you rude to random strangers?
[Amit Varma]: Did you call people names just because they disagreed with you on something?
[Amit Varma]: Did you have close friends you had never even met?
[Amit Varma]: Were you running around the neighborhood showing photographs of your food to everyone?
[Amit Varma]: If someone said something funny, did you respond with a string of letters like LOL or ROT FL AMO?
[Amit Varma]: Did you look people in the eye when you spoke to them? In fact, that's a pretty good question. Did you look them in the eye?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science, please. Welcome your host
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh welcome to the seen in the unseen my topic for today is online
[Amit Varma]: conversations the internet has transformed how we speak to one another and
[Amit Varma]: Indeed how we exist as society and even how we are as individuals on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: We've been empowered with information and knowledge and the ability to make connections both with other people and with new ideas
[Amit Varma]: We have wider and more diverse social circles. All our interactions are so much richer
[Amit Varma]: But on the flip side the internet seems to reveal the dark side of human nature
[Amit Varma]: Anonymity emboldens us to express our deepest prejudices all the bigotry and misogyny
[Amit Varma]: We otherwise never would show to anyone and we behave in ways online that we would not even consider in real life
[Amit Varma]: Also instead of bringing us together the internet might actually be driving us apart
[Amit Varma]: the internet makes it possible for us to form different echo chambers really large echo chambers of people who share our interest or
[Amit Varma]: ideologies or prejudices some of them repulsive to others even as we close ourselves off to views and people who don't match us as
[Amit Varma]: A society we are getting more and more polarized as
[Amit Varma]: Individuals we are becoming more and more strident and judgmental. How did we get here?
[Amit Varma]: What can we do about it? To discuss all this I have with me a guest who has seen this evolution of human conversation
[Amit Varma]: Close up
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil has been a moderator at reddit for a few years and I bumped into him socially a few days ago and had a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: Conversation with him. He's a perfect guest for the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: But before we get into our conversation, here's a small commercial break
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to well
[Amit Varma]: You need to listen to some more check out the ones from IVM podcasts who co-produced the show with me
[Amit Varma]: Go to IVM podcast com or download the IVM app and you'll find a host of great Indian
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts that cover every subject you could think of from the magazine
[Amit Varma]: I edit Pragati at ThinkPragati.com
[Amit Varma]: There is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan Srinath. There is a brilliant Hindi podcast
[Amit Varma]: Hulia Bhaji hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Saurabh Chandra and apart from these policy podcasts IVM has shows that cover music
[Amit Varma]: films, finance, sports, sci-fi, tech and the LGBT community all
[Amit Varma]: Under one roof or rather all in one app. So download the IVM podcast app today
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen in the unseen Nikhil. Hi nice to be here
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really fascinated of what made you start off as a moderator on reddit like were you a user before that?
[Guest]: Actually, yes, so I
[Guest]: Used to be on a lot of online forums. I enjoy talking online
[Guest]: I like quite often I like the anonymity and I like the ability to engage with people from many different places
[Guest]: And it's always been very fascinating to see how interactions happen
[Guest]: It's I've seen people lose their minds because some small thing happened in a video game or some small change
[Guest]: And then I've seen other really high
[Guest]: sophisticated discussions on the most
[Guest]: Minute parts of code and computer architecture somewhere else. So I was wondering what made a difference
[Guest]: So I read it was the new big thing and it was one of the few places where you got a lot of interesting
[Guest]: Conversation and I was there for a long while and in the subreddit which I was on just sort of a constrained topic forum
[Guest]: Where they were looking for moderators. They were looking for people to help them deal with the influx of new users and
[Guest]: Disruptive behavior to put it mildly which they were seeing and
[Guest]: I'd always been on the forum as a user. I always communicate and I always suggest ideas, which I had seen work in other places and
[Guest]: They finally said that you know, you've been here for so long. You have all these ideas
[Guest]: Why don't you try and implement them?
[Guest]: And I thought it's been years of me looking at all of these other forums and all of these other ideas
[Guest]: So let's try let's see what happens if we implement them
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you a personal question. Were you a different person offline than you were online when you got online?
[Guest]: Well, that's a difficult question to answer
[Guest]: I think yes to a certain degree of online I am
[Guest]: Far, it's more about what ideas I have. So I reduce my interactions to those topics, which I feel strongly about and
[Guest]: I can express or have or try to have an opinion on
[Guest]: Whereas in real life, there are a lot of topics where I just don't know anything whatsoever, and I have to interact on them
[Guest]: And so I tend to be a little bit more
[Guest]: reticent
[Guest]: in real life
[Guest]: Then I am online, but then online there are a lot of places
[Guest]: I avoid interacting because I believe that I'm really not in a good position to talk about it
[Amit Varma]: Right. So offline essentially you're you know, you're mixing with people and you're doing small talk
[Amit Varma]: But you're never actually doing small talk online in your case
[Amit Varma]: You're just engaging when the subject concerns you deeply
[Guest]: Usually of course there are always something or topics or the other which are just amusing or some
[Guest]: Ridiculous picture of cats or something or the other which just catches your eye and you will say something stupid out there
[Guest]: But yeah, if you look at but you can usually find out what topics i'm very interested in if someone were to
[Guest]: Just go through the comments i've written on the topics i've spoken about so yes
[Guest]: And is there any early online behavior from you which you now regret?
[Amit Varma]: That's another tough one. I would love to say no
[Guest]: I really can't think of anything at this point even something that's mildly embarrassing not that you would regret
[Amit Varma]: Or mildly embarrassing I do on a regular basis. So that's really not changed
[Guest]: There every so often there are comments where I do talk about a topic which I want to know more about
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: So for example, if there's an advanced subject, which I want to learn
[Guest]: I go there I look at what other people are talking about
[Guest]: And then I try and put my opinion of forward and then I realize a little later
[Guest]: I really didn't know what I was talking about and that's incredibly embarrassing
[Guest]: So how uh, like when you became from being a heavy user when you became a moderator
[Amit Varma]: Uh, what did you learn?
[Amit Varma]: How did that change the way you looked at reddit and at the kind of online conversations you were part of?
[Amit Varma]: That's a big topic. So I think this in itself should be broken up into parts. Let's break it up
[Guest]: Sure, so let's discuss why so first and foremost I come in from this. I really want to see conversation online succeed
[Guest]: I think it's really important for all of us. We do most of our conversation online and frankly
[Guest]: A large portion of our personalities today is just done by typing words in
[Guest]: So not being able to type words in being banned or being
[Guest]: Restricted from saying something is effectively having that part of you online amputated
[Guest]: Because there is only the act of speaking you can do online
[Guest]: You can only speak and not being able to speak is a very big thing
[Guest]: You may be saying stupid stuff and you may be talking about something totally irrelevant
[Guest]: But the fact that you can and cannot is everything to your online personality. So I thought this is really
[Guest]: Interesting and very different part of our lives and i've been here before the internet
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: To have that that tool where you can all talk to all of these people and you can see all of these people
[Guest]: Was a big thing and then seeing it misused
[Guest]: From almost the get-go. So a little pre-history
[Guest]: When there was no facebook, no twitter
[Guest]: Pre-history when there was no facebook, no reddit people found ways to abuse each other on discussions about
[Guest]: compiler code and
[Guest]: Just on basic things where you wouldn't expect it. People can get very passionate and fight about that
[Guest]: and there's just tons and tons of
[Guest]: Stories from those days where people were looking at and they were going
[Guest]: Okay, that's really not what we expected people to do and that's sort of this
[Guest]: this apocryphal body of work
[Guest]: Before moderating became as and before the modern research started happening on it today
[Guest]: About what to do what rules should be applied to make a good conversation online
[Guest]: because when you went online you'd find that a lot of people would just
[Guest]: Like if you had a topic on religion or politics, they would get very ugly
[Guest]: So actually let's move back. Have you ever heard of the term eternal september? No. No, tell me about it. So eternal september is one of those
[Guest]: Those those terms which encompass the whole idea like signal versus noise
[Guest]: And this is part of that
[Guest]: Those terms which people use to be frank moderating is not very researched as a science or anything right now
[Guest]: But a lot more work is going into understanding how we interact online
[Guest]: But before that there were terms like eternal september
[Guest]: eternal september
[Guest]: There was a forum called usenet a bunch of forums called usenet. This is around the 1990s and a little earlier than that
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: The general pattern was that there were a bunch of people out there who were familiar who knew had a certain
[Guest]: General code of how to communicate and talk to each other every so often in the year
[Guest]: There would be a new influx of users a periodic influx from a bunch of colleges where people came there
[Guest]: They now had access to usenet and they would come in
[Guest]: And that was generally called and that was usually in september and that period would be a period of adjustment
[Guest]: They would have to the new users would end up learning and imbibing the general rules of and code of conduct online
[Guest]: And the forums would continue in peace
[Guest]: Except finally in one day in 1993 when AOL allowed all of its users to use and access usenet
[Guest]: And essentially there was a very large influx of users so large that the ability of the forums to
[Guest]: Condition and educate people on the ways they would people used to behave online disappeared. It was more than the old guard's ability to
[Guest]: help or guide people or
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: Don't know you could use any amount of words. You could even use indoctrinate if you're being very uncharitable
[Guest]: But it's not it was more like understanding how to talk to each other
[Guest]: And that was termed eternal september. That's a fantastic term and it's like we're still in an eternal september. Yes, it is
[Guest]: mostly it's the sort of most
[Guest]: horrifying version of eternal september you can think of because
[Guest]: Everyone's a kid online so to speak today. We've the rules of the house or general rules of decorum
[Guest]: Either seem to have been forgotten or they haven't been discovered by a vast majority of people
[Guest]: And it's very scary to think of and a large majority of india, which is not online yet
[Guest]: so those
[Guest]: Our way of communicating with each other is
[Guest]: Very important. Let's go back to the usenet days for a moment that then I assume that
[Amit Varma]: In those days you could say that whatever policing or moderation there was
[Amit Varma]: Was not like overt moderation. It was more just a community sort of thing where the communities were small enough
[Amit Varma]: that you figured out what are the acceptable ways of
[Amit Varma]: You know conversing with other people the acceptable behaviors and you quickly adapted to them and and
[Amit Varma]: That was manageable every september when a small bunch of new people
[Amit Varma]: Came in and they quickly learned and those who didn't learn went and those who learned stayed on and so on
[Amit Varma]: Went and those who learned stayed on and became stalwarts and then suddenly one day it all opens up and it's a free-for-all and
[Amit Varma]: Everyone is sort of there. So how did how did the various forums then sort of start adjusting to it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean there would have been what were the different schools of thought on this we should do nothing
[Amit Varma]: We should you know police it in this way. We should police it in that way. So
[Guest]: This is going really back and internet time so before there were very large
[Guest]: Social media sites and aggregators like facebook. I think the most places that I would go to were forums and
[Guest]: You would tend so there would be some technical forums game forums were quite popular and all these tended to have a small community
[Guest]: So it's quite easy to understand the general rules
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: the general code of conduct
[Guest]: The moderators that I knew at that time generally didn't have to moderate for content or quantity or policy
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: Yes, there would inevitably be some someone or the other who would try and attack the forum or try to attack users
[Guest]: And those people tended to get banned and there are a lot of stories of even back then of how that
[Guest]: That those halcyon days were even filled with problems and issues
[Guest]: But nothing at I think at the scale at which we're dealing with now
[Guest]: So for example back at that time one of the biggest problems you would always face was spam
[Guest]: You would have someone or some robot which would come online and just constantly spam you so those basic spam filters would deal with it
[Guest]: But then there were also some users who for some reason decided it was their life's mission to harass either the entire forum
[Guest]: Or harass a specific user and that would be something which moderators of old would try and go and weed out and ban
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: Even in that time there were issues of groups of people targeting each other
[Guest]: So for example, a lot of forums find it their life's mission to oppose an idea
[Guest]: And then to oppose and attack everyone who embodies that idea very famously would be
[Guest]: a nazi supremacist forum finding jewish forums or even
[Guest]: Forums where people congregate for different reasons
[Guest]: around judaism and attack the users over there
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Even before reddit and before many of the other of facebook people
[Guest]: Were finding ways to harass and weaponize speech online
[Guest]: What's happened? So the next major website I remember i'm going to was a technical website called slash.dot
[Guest]: This was
[Guest]: It was very interesting because everyone could upvote all their topics
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: When you upvoted a topic you had different criteria on which you could upvote it. You could say it was insightful
[Guest]: It was funny instead of having a generic like or dislike button
[Guest]: There was different varieties on ways you could upvote and you could say this person's contributing to the conversation
[Amit Varma]: And slash.dot if I remember had a huge number of users
[Amit Varma]: So you actually got a very good sample size of these different kinds of upvotes and downvotes for it to be meaningful
[Guest]: Yes, and around that time what people started discussing was the concept of signal versus noise
[Guest]: So that was the realization that not all conversation online is on topic
[Guest]: And not all conversation online is as insightful as
[Guest]: Listening to the most intelligent person on that topic speak
[Guest]: So that's signal versus noise is sort of the other
[Guest]: major way people explain the issues online that
[Guest]: you have
[Guest]: Lots and lots of people talking not all of it is worthwhile
[Guest]: The question which then started bothering me is that how do you get the most useful information to come up?
[Guest]: And sadly, it turns out that even a voting system like what slash.dot used where you could say that this comment is insightful
[Guest]: And this comment is funny or this comment is interesting did not necessarily make it such
[Guest]: That the most useful or relevant information came up most often
[Guest]: The most popular opinion still managed to be heard
[Guest]: And this is generally going to be the theme
[Guest]: Of what we see with interactions online
[Guest]: That it's just sheer numbers which tend to influence
[Guest]: how
[Guest]: We end up talking and what we end up talking about
[Amit Varma]: And like I remember I started my blog India Uncut in 2003-2004
[Amit Varma]: And after a while, I found that my traffic was too much for me to have comments enabled
[Amit Varma]: Because again, I couldn't handle the noise to signal ratio and I figured out rather than try and moderate or keep an eye on it
[Amit Varma]: Or whatever. I simply won't have comments because it's it is after all my style
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: You know save myself that mental bandwidth and I remember chatting with a friend of mine who ran a blog called Sepia Mutiny
[Amit Varma]: a very fine blog
[Amit Varma]: you know desi americans and
[Amit Varma]: One of the guys who started that was a chap called Manish Vedge
[Amit Varma]: And Manish once told me when he spoke about his comments policy
[Amit Varma]: And I was always very surprised because they had they also had very decent traffic
[Amit Varma]: But their comment section was always pretty good and he said oh we ban liberally and we don't just ban for trolling or abuse
[Amit Varma]: We ban for stupidity. Yes, which uh, you know brings an interesting question of even when you talk about signal and noise
[Amit Varma]: there are many categories of noise and there is a certain subjectivity to it and
[Amit Varma]: The hard part for a moderator then becomes where do you draw the line? You don't want to you know
[Amit Varma]: Have commenters or readers feeling that shit
[Amit Varma]: This is only meant to be an echo chamber for people who agree with this guy
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time you do want to weed out bad behavior. And is it an issue sort of
[Amit Varma]: Finding those boundaries defining those boundaries have they changed over time?
[Guest]: So yes in general there is an issue quite often finding boundaries
[Guest]: Mostly because as you as you asked yes boundaries move
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: In general the way i've approached or what i've been exposed to has almost always been dominated by the uh,
[Guest]: General american viewpoint that free speech is critical and free speech is good
[Guest]: And that the more free speech the better chances for drowning out bad ideas
[Guest]: This was the general philosophy which which is why even on reddit. There's always been
[Guest]: Such a pushback against moderation where
[Guest]: Where what your friend did is turns out to be probably one of the only ways to deal with it and what you did
[Guest]: Is turning out increasingly to be the only way for people to deal with conversations. There are many very large websites, which have entirely
[Guest]: Shut down their comment section may be mistaken, but I believe either a scientific american or a major
[Guest]: Website has shut down their comment section
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: It's a bit sad, but people don't interact
[Guest]: In ways which are healthy
[Guest]: Or in the best spirit of humanity
[Guest]: So to go with an example of what happens when I ended up moderating on reddit
[Guest]: It was after the forum was actually dealing with such thing when the forum which was created was very small
[Guest]: And it was built on that principle that let everyone speak let everyone share ideas no matter how good bad or ugly
[Guest]: And deal with the bad ideas
[Guest]: Unfortunately, it turns out that since your entire existence online is wrong
[Guest]: Words are also very literally violence online. You can
[Guest]: Gang up on a person and prevent them from speaking. You can compress their ideas and you can move them away
[Guest]: You can form the internet really helps people find each other and this also means making lots and lots of ideological ghettos
[Guest]: So that process and those ghettos more are quite common in the internet
[Guest]: What would happen on the forum is that if someone had an opposing viewpoint, they would get relentlessly hounded and since everyone was expected to behave on their own
[Guest]: In whatever manner was befitting them
[Guest]: Well, since no one was stopping them they behaved in any which way they liked which would quite often just be straight-up harassment
[Guest]: If you're a woman online, it's not a good scene. It's very very bad
[Guest]: People would find them if by chance you let them in and you let them in and you let them in
[Guest]: If you're a woman online, it's not a good scene. It's very very bad. People would find them if by chance you let people know
[Guest]: You're a woman online then you would be targeted you would be targeted all throughout the web and you would be harassed
[Amit Varma]: What is sort of the men to women ratio in a place like Reddit for example?
[Amit Varma]: In terms of active commenters, do you have any idea?
[Amit Varma]: No idea because you'd imagine that it would become a sort of a vicious circle where
[Amit Varma]: Women just don't feel welcome because there are so many men many of them abusive and therefore they just don't bother to
[Guest]: Participate and I'm very certain that's the case and I'm sure
[Guest]: Most people who go and interact out there either choose places where they are welcome
[Guest]: Right, or they have a very thick skin or they just avoid they come to those places
[Guest]: where they know these conversations can happen and either try to engage or
[Guest]: I'm or they
[Guest]: Ignore those conversations focus on the parts which can be useful. But
[Guest]: For the exact ratio. I don't know and knowing in itself would bother me because that would be mean that there's some way to
[Amit Varma]: Identify who's who yeah, exactly. Oh, so, you know, i'm not a reddit user per se once in a while
[Amit Varma]: I'll see a link and go and I really like the keto subreddit which
[Amit Varma]: Is a fantastic subreddit and i'm of course a keto evangelizer
[Amit Varma]: So here's what it seems to me reddit's fundamental problem is let me just articulate this and tell me if i've got it
[Amit Varma]: Right that on the one hand it is true that
[Amit Varma]: Freedom of speech is something that really applies to a state acting against the citizens and if you are like a private
[Amit Varma]: Party like a website you have the right to set whatever rules you want
[Amit Varma]: And if people don't abide by those rules, they can go elsewhere or you can ban them or moderate them
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, you deem fit and therefore people shouldn't really complain
[Amit Varma]: But the other way of looking at it is that community sites like reddit and facebook
[Amit Varma]: Are so large and all-encompassing that for many people they are the world where they exist
[Amit Varma]: And to stop somebody from expressing herself in a world like this would be very cruel
[Amit Varma]: Among other things and the idea you mentioned of letting free speech prevail
[Amit Varma]: I mean one of the fundamental defenses of free speech
[Amit Varma]: Comes from the phrase a marketplace of ideas that to get to whatever the truth might be on any subject at all
[Amit Varma]: You have to let
[Amit Varma]: All ideas find expression and then let whichever ideas win out in the marketplace of ideas
[Amit Varma]: That's that's really the function but you can't stop anyone from speaking which is the original intention
[Amit Varma]: But uh, and that's reddit's dilemma that because of the noise to signal ratio
[Amit Varma]: It must moderate but at the same time there are huge costs to
[Amit Varma]: uh moderating both philosophically in terms of the principle of free speech
[Amit Varma]: And also practically in terms of what it can mean for users for whom reddit is a whole world
[Guest]: Right, I agree. So
[Guest]: funnily
[Guest]: One part of the internet which did work
[Guest]: I used this idea recently and someone challenged it with a far more sophisticated, uh approach. They linked to an old
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: I think us supreme court or us court, uh,
[Guest]: or a law journal where they discuss this idea and the limitations on uh, how well the free speech the
[Guest]: marketplace of ideas as an idea itself works
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: For one I like the analogy. It's very simple
[Guest]: I like the marketplace of idea because it gets the idea across what we're really trying to do where we're trying to share ideas
[Guest]: But there are a lot of things which are automatically limited
[Guest]: So it's not that all speeches you're allowed to say fire shout fire or in a crowded. Uh,
[Guest]: Theater, you're not we don't have unlimited free speech
[Guest]: anyway, and if you're in india, there are a lot of topics which you cannot speak about because
[Guest]: If you do and you talk about them in a certain way, you will cause harm to others
[Guest]: And the state has decided that that's not okay
[Guest]: Okay, in general there are certain ideas which we do not discuss in our marketplaces
[Amit Varma]: I think if I can just i've uh, you know
[Amit Varma]: The shouted shouting uh fire in a crowded theater analogy is actually
[Amit Varma]: One that I don't agree with and i've written a column about this
[Amit Varma]: In fact a couple of columns it's it bugs me a lot when people use it
[Amit Varma]: Because here's the thing if you shout fire in a crowded theater if the patron does it when there's no fire
[Amit Varma]: He's defrauding his customers if a customer does it he is in a sense defrauding the patron and he's disrupting
[Amit Varma]: Uh all the other people who have uh, you know paid for a good experience, which is being disrupted
[Amit Varma]: So on all of these grounds you can condemn that behavior and stop it
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to it's not an attack on free speech to do so per se
[Amit Varma]: If someone shouts fire in a crowded theater, there are various grounds including property rights
[Amit Varma]: uh and contracts on which you can actually prosecute him and
[Amit Varma]: Punish him. I mean i'm a i'm a free speech absolutist as you would have figured but I keep pointing out that we're going to have fun
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I keep pointing out that uh, you know
[Amit Varma]: My my free speech absolutism really comes down to how the state deals with the citizens
[Amit Varma]: Uh, because I believe the citizen should be in charge and not the state
[Amit Varma]: And people seem to have the opposite view as a default
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't apply to how a private entity like reddit
[Amit Varma]: Deals with its users because as far as I can see reddit has its terms of use
[Amit Varma]: And those terms of use obviously include things like you shall not do ad homonyms
[Amit Varma]: And you shall not abuse and you shall all of those things
[Amit Varma]: And they are entirely within their rights to kick out any users who have signed that terms of those terms of use and don't comply
[Amit Varma]: So to me, that's not so much a free speech issue in the classical sense of the term
[Guest]: So I too started out from the position of view that free speech is that my driving force has been to figure out what works
[Guest]: Figure out what works and i've come to the conclusion that if you if you use the analogy of the marketplace of ideas
[Guest]: A lot of things don't work
[Guest]: The big issue is that a lot of people can get together and suppress a good idea
[Guest]: So a lot of people want to get together and they want to suppress discussion on
[Guest]: Uh racism, for example
[Guest]: They want to suppress certain discussion on religion or they want to specifically focus discussion on xyz topic about a different religion
[Guest]: and these things these the previous
[Guest]: This protection and the shield which we had in the previous era was that these things were very amorphous. They were
[Guest]: not necessarily something you could
[Guest]: Tangibly see but as a moderator or as a user online these things happen every day now because all your interactions are about conversation
[Guest]: You can end up spamming the feed you can keep or you can very subtly ensure that certain conversations get
[Guest]: Downvoted and disappear whereas other conversations which you prefer get or get upvoted
[Guest]: so it's now more a question of
[Guest]: whether the original idea of
[Guest]: The original conception of this marketplace where everyone gets together and share ideas is still working and in the new era
[Guest]: It's not practically speaking. There are many ways in which
[Guest]: Free speech as we knew it. It's
[Amit Varma]: Done and dusted. I think you can argue though. I agree with you, but as a counter you could argue that
[Amit Varma]: The marketplace of ideas was always extremely slow to work
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you had read it in say 1820 in America and someone said slavery is bad and we should abolish it
[Amit Varma]: the same thing would happen to them what you just described that the majority of people would just download them and
[Amit Varma]: Shout them out or troll them or whatever and it wouldn't matter and it would seem as if in the marketplace of ideas
[Amit Varma]: Pro-slavery has won and then society sort of took its own time to change gradually. So it's never immediate
[Amit Varma]: But the whole idea I think of the marketplace of ideas is that at least those ideas are allowed to exist in some form
[Guest]: right, this is the marketplace of ideas if I remember correct that actually what you said is a sort of uh,
[Guest]: One of the criticisms of the original concept and said that there's never really been a functional marketplace in the first place
[Guest]: Because there are several concepts which are as it is banned by the states or controlled by the states. You cannot discuss them libel
[Guest]: So, um, there are certain topics which the majority will automatically take a stand on
[Amit Varma]: I think india is very harsh and unduly harsh on free speech
[Amit Varma]: But in the us the first amendment is really quite excellent
[Guest]: I think in terms it is and finally the the person who was criticizing the concept of
[Guest]: free speech and the marketplace of ideas was a
[Guest]: Person in on an american law journal, right?
[Guest]: So there are limitations
[Guest]: No idea is perfect and you don't deal with platonic ideas in the first place and there will always be
[Guest]: the thing which was most critical to me to realize was
[Guest]: That when you started out putting rules in our forum, we said basic rules. Don't harass
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: Hunt people and don't go and be abusive very simple straightforward rules
[Guest]: And then what would happen is that once those rules?
[Guest]: got in place
[Guest]: And people became familiar with them they go and we banned several users and said no you cannot behave this way
[Guest]: You cannot just intentionally put insightful material. You cannot intentionally go and find this particular
[Guest]: Uh subgroup of people you don't like for example furries and decide you want to just abuse them. That's just not okay
[Guest]: There's no reason for you to use our forum to just harass furries
[Guest]: It's not something which we really care about and we're not going to give you a space to do that because that's
[Guest]: Goes and causes other problems. It makes other people upset and it just starts a chain reaction. Absolutely
[Guest]: So that's one of the things where I agree with your friend that yes
[Guest]: You need to you end up coming to a position where you have to use the ban hammer very often
[Guest]: and our first attempts were very
[Guest]: Distant and practical. We said we will generally use it and as little as we can and for the most egregious violations
[Guest]: But what happens is when you move the frontier
[Guest]: You have a new level of peace. You have no longer the same kind of horrendous things happening as before
[Guest]: But then what happens?
[Guest]: People find new ways to abuse that they find
[Guest]: So the term which I love about this is fractal stupidity
[Guest]: It once you've established a set of ground rules
[Guest]: They find that they can tweak these particular ground rules or they can find another way to harass someone
[Guest]: They can just follow someone and constantly repeat certain things which are not offensive, but are
[Guest]: Either dog whistles or either just slanted the right way to read as offensive
[Guest]: Or they can constantly tag a user in a conversation. There are many ways in which give me an example of this
[Guest]: all right, so
[Guest]: Once we've banned a lot of this behavior
[Guest]: There were people who would find ways to show up in conversations about XYZ subgroup and say well
[Guest]: These people have always done this what you expect and it wouldn't be outright offensive
[Guest]: They wouldn't be saying these people need to die. They would always be saying something which was polite and
[Guest]: Obviously rude and now that was a problem for us because now they no longer we we were used to the old
[Guest]: Frontier, which was straight-up death threats hate speech abuse here. They're not saying anything wrong
[Guest]: They're using plain simple English and they're saying something which when translated is obviously offensive
[Guest]: But we had restricted ourselves because of our previous rules
[Guest]: We said we would not deal with something and we would not ban someone or harm someone for saying such things
[Guest]: We would only ban them if they said and outrightly hateful things
[Guest]: So now what do we do with this because this is obviously wrong
[Guest]: And we were constrained and we knew that so finally this we let it go
[Guest]: Eventually this became the new rule and then finally we had to come up with a new set of rules
[Guest]: And then finally we had to come up with a new set of rules because a lot of the users said that is obviously an attack
[Guest]: Right, you need to deal with it. And so the frontier moved
[Guest]: And you keep moving the frontier forward and forward. Yes, and this causes a lot of pain as the frontier moves is the
[Guest]: Advance of complexity. So first you're just this really simple line. Don't abuse each other now
[Guest]: you have this new line which says
[Guest]: You really can't use these particular types of abuse and you can't use this particular type of abuse
[Guest]: And then some guy will say that guy is doing that. Why are you stopping me from saying this?
[Guest]: So now you get the advent of lawyers
[Guest]: Reddit lawyers
[Guest]: They go through your rules and they say that person broke that rule by just that square inch and you banned him
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Or they'll say you stopped me from making this post and see all of these people are saying all of these horrible things
[Guest]: They're not saying horrible things. They're saying things which that person thinks is horrible and he's saying you're lying them
[Amit Varma]: Why aren't you lying me?
[Amit Varma]: So just as the members are in a sense at the mercy of the moderators are the moderators also being constantly held accountable by the members
[Guest]: They are but at the end of the day the moderators have far more power and they can eventually stop paying attention
[Guest]: and so
[Guest]: Actually, that's not true
[Guest]: the moderators cannot really be held in the same way users can be
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day moderators enjoy a significant amount of power
[Guest]: And a certain amount of opacity
[Amit Varma]: Of their actions and do moderators like argue with each other about where the line should be and where in my team
[Guest]: Yes in a certain extent in our team
[Guest]: We have attempted to keep that sort of different set of ideologies alive
[Guest]: but what we are finding is that the older set of moderators who still remember the old free speech days are
[Guest]: Increasingly a more quiet bunch and the newer moderators
[Guest]: Especially ones who are having uh more experience from a lot of the other forums and so on are very clear that yes
[Guest]: These are the only things that work
[Amit Varma]: You're not going to have a conversation and you need to get rid of the new moderators are not reinventing the wheel
[Amit Varma]: But they're also discovering new kinds of behavior, which they have figured out how to deal with. Yeah, so there are
[Guest]: depending upon the size of your subreddit the type of interactions you have can be
[Guest]: Very minor or they can be a very massive amount of interactions
[Guest]: For example our keto doesn't have that many subscribers compared to a subreddit like world news
[Guest]: And world news or has to have its own stable of moderators to deal with it because a lot of the topics out there can
[Guest]: attract
[Guest]: Emotions from every corner of the world and they really need to be on the ball with figuring out
[Guest]: What the hell is acceptable or not?
[Guest]: But our keto on the other hand is what I'd call a topic constrained forum
[Guest]: People go there because they want something to do they want to figure out how to get their keto diet working
[Guest]: They want to showcase their successes. I think these forums in general are one of the few places which work
[Guest]: Because they are what I prefer calling them this sort of vector quantity. There is a start point and a direction, right?
[Guest]: Whereas other con topics which are just general where people can come in and discuss politics and religion almost inevitably
[Guest]: follow a very sad path of
[Guest]: Polarization anger and fighting and then heavy moderation if any
[Amit Varma]: So Nikhil tell me something in all these years that you've been
[Amit Varma]: First a user and then a moderator and so on how have online conversations changed?
[Guest]: So when I would go to forums initially, it was not
[Guest]: That trivial and it was very hard for people to find these places
[Guest]: You would either be a gamer or you would be a technical person and you would find these things
[Guest]: And so you people tended to be in communities, which they already knew about but once you had facebook and twitter and reddit
[Guest]: Then it became far larger aggregations and youtube comments. So what we I started noticing is that
[Guest]: In my bubble where I where people would rather use full sentences. It was
[Guest]: People tried to be civil but then as more and more people just started coming on online people quite often didn't have the same
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: Reasons or need to talk in the same manner. So you started having
[Guest]: Far your word length or questions would go down the topics change people generally quite often just like shooting the shit. So a lot of
[Guest]: um general time pass because I guess less personal connect because of larger groups
[Guest]: So therefore and also a lot of topics which were just for fun
[Guest]: like general
[Guest]: So one of the big things which you find in a lot of forums and what you need to actually where a lot of the rules
[Guest]: Start coming out is just jokes
[Guest]: Because people online if you're going to a serious discussion
[Guest]: There are a lot of people who don't really have anything to contribute
[Guest]: They're there to watch but they feel an urge to go and say something funny or to say some
[Guest]: They find something amusing and that's usually the most common content which you tend to have to moderate out of existence
[Guest]: You have to say okay, no jokes. That's pretty cruel
[Guest]: So you'll find that jokes perform so well
[Guest]: Because it's so easy for everyone to get
[Guest]: That they used to go and they would end up crushing the rest of the more insightful comments
[Guest]: So the longest hardest to read comment is the one which very few people would read
[Guest]: And the more funny simpler comment would be the one which is on top
[Guest]: So that I observed you could see that effect of how just easy to consume material would dominate
[Guest]: And you'd see that not just in the comments
[Guest]: You saw you started seeing that in content and then you saw the buzzfeeds of the world
[Guest]: You saw how all of them worked
[Guest]: You saw how people understood memes in a very deep and fundamental way
[Amit Varma]: And all of this would also then become a disincentive for the more serious comment and would have a chilling effect on the deeper stuff
[Guest]: Absolutely
[Guest]: So you would have to make very serious efforts to
[Guest]: To let that part of your garden grow because it turns out jokes and memes are sort of like weeds
[Guest]: They're very hardy
[Guest]: They can get into your brain
[Guest]: They can stick there and they can dominate your short-term memory and even your long-term memory and in the sense that
[Guest]: Well, they don't dominate a long term. They'll dominate your short term, but
[Amit Varma]: They end up crowding out everything else and also I mean, I've seen an analog of this in twitter where the most common mode of
[Amit Varma]: Expression on twitter is snark because it's so easy to be snarky about someone
[Amit Varma]: oh, yeah, you know someone says something you don't agree with you make a one-line joke and you mock him and
[Amit Varma]: 50 people RT you and everybody's oh you're so witty while you actually didn't address the argument at all
[Amit Varma]: you just said something supposedly witty and
[Guest]: Because that's just easy to consume I think that analogy with junk food
[Guest]: This is just so easy to get it may not answer the question may not deal with the issue
[Guest]: But you read it you got it you figured out the positions you felt happy
[Guest]: You got you got some superficial understanding of the matter and you're on your way
[Guest]: And you stuff your face with it and you feel good and I'll give you an even more fascinating way that
[Guest]: People are using this to spam accounts. So this this is a bit different and a little off topic
[Guest]: so today recently someone pointed out what's happening on reddit is that
[Guest]: People are trying to create authentic looking accounts
[Guest]: So that they can use those accounts later on when a crisis occurs or they want to mold opinion
[Guest]: So a lot of forums now have and a lot of subreddits have blockers
[Guest]: They say that if you are not an authentic account with so many years of age and so many comment points
[Guest]: You are probably a fake account. So you are not allowed to post you have to get your score up
[Guest]: And then you can post it's just sort of a are you human test?
[Guest]: So what they're doing now these guys these they write a program
[Guest]: They look at us they look at maybe our keto or our cooking. They see one of the most popular topics
[Guest]: They see what the title was
[Guest]: They wait a little while they recreate that topic
[Guest]: Because now they know they at what time to post it and whether that's going to get up and it's performed well before
[Guest]: So now when this gets posted it will perform well again, so they get a lot of points
[Guest]: Then they look at whichever the most popular comments
[Guest]: Someone had written over there whatever the top most funny comment was and they recreate that verbatim
[Guest]: They just copy paste that so it looks like a really funny insightful article by someone with a very funny insightful top comment
[Amit Varma]: And people like oh, hey, that's really funny and they will upvote it
[Amit Varma]: And is someone gaming the system and this could easily be russian bots in the future
[Guest]: It's just advertisers matter of fact
[Guest]: They have one bot make this they have another bot come in and put the funny comment and then they have another bot
[Guest]: Respond to that comment and people just read it and they think it's two natural people talking to each other
[Guest]: So they just keep upvoting it and they just farm enough credibility copying human content or the most popular content
[Guest]: Regurgitating it and people find it always funny and they keep upvoting it
[Amit Varma]: This creates a and does this mean that overall the more serious minded people stop taking part?
[Amit Varma]: Right, it's in a sense a selection process for the crap
[Guest]: Yeah in some ways so all the serious people end up moving on to more serious discussion forums
[Guest]: Where the topic is meant to be?
[Guest]: More slow or more and handled in depth and you'll see a lot of those forums have far less communication
[Guest]: There are fewer topics which are discussed or people have fewer comments
[Guest]: They tend to read or they tend to discuss or there's a way to figure out people who are
[Guest]: Bullshitting versus the people who are actually serious about the topic
[Guest]: So for example, if you're talking about economics, there are forums where people can just bullshit all day about it
[Guest]: But then there's a certain sub forum
[Guest]: On just economics where they spend all their time arguing what is bad economics or not
[Guest]: And over there if you post something and you want to make your own post on it
[Guest]: You have to give a reason with a full-fledged explanation as to why
[Guest]: What you are talking about is an example of bad economics and you have to dice
[Guest]: It's essentially a short dissertation and then people decide whether that's actually passes the rule
[Guest]: If so, it's allowed your post is allowed to be kept. Otherwise, it's removed and that's a test
[Guest]: It's essentially this proof of intelligence test, which a lot of forums have to do now
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of a long tail of content in a sense though that you you know, the
[Amit Varma]: Adaptation even the very intelligent will find their niche where they are comfortable and they are not crowded out
[Amit Varma]: But those will be very small niches and right won't have an impact on the overall discourse
[Guest]: Correct because unless you even knew it existed you wouldn't go there and the topics quite often over there are very arcane
[Guest]: And they're discussing, for example, our bad economics will discuss the very fine-tuned details about x y z
[Guest]: Predictor of let's say the gender wage gap and they have a huge document on it
[Guest]: And frankly, most people will never go through it
[Guest]: So whenever the topic of gender wages come up or gender disparities come up
[Guest]: No one will have recourse to that information and the conversations will be dominated
[Guest]: The public perception and the popular perception will be dominated by the media
[Guest]: Popular perception will be dominated by the easier to consume concepts the hard ideological positions and the performative propaganda
[Guest]: All will disappear
[Guest]: So unless you have an easy way to package something or put an idea that will dominate
[Guest]: Whether it's right or wrong is a different issue
[Guest]: Whether if it's easy to consume and share and it sounds right for the zeitgeist at the time that will usually work
[Amit Varma]: And what is it about like when did you see this change happening more and more becoming dominant?
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember back from my days of blogging in the second half of the last decade, you know 2005 onwards
[Amit Varma]: There was an oyster signal ratio problem and so on but things hadn't come this far
[Amit Varma]: Uh, is there a point where you can say that? Okay, this was a trigger
[Amit Varma]: This is when you know, maybe when facebook passed a certain critical mass or to be honest
[Guest]: I really can't recognize the point. It just constantly feels that we've been iterating our way forward
[Guest]: I can't find a moment where I can say. Okay, this is disturbing
[Guest]: I can see moments where new ideas were
[Guest]: uh discovered where new
[Guest]: Advances were done in design for applications. I can remember the point where people said. Oh, we have we should incorporate
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: Behavioral psychology in our design for applications
[Guest]: I can remember when people said we should a b test websites to make them more interesting
[Guest]: But this the way conversations online has changed
[Guest]: Like really struggled to figure out a moment when I said this happened or this changed it
[Guest]: There there are many serious events which have happened online in facebook on reddit where people's perception changed
[Guest]: But it feels that in some way we've been just inching forward where teams of people have been trying to figure out ways to deal
[Guest]: With this problem. They've been figuring out a patch. They've been deploying it and then we deal with the next problem
[Amit Varma]: We discover so as a civilization. We've kind of been bringing it in here. Yeah
[Guest]: Yeah, it from from a moderator perspective. It very much feels that we've been winging it and now hey here we are
[Guest]: And everyone suddenly realized this is not necessarily a great place to be
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so i'm now going to uh cycle into the specific and ask you some questions about your time as a
[Amit Varma]: Reddit moderator, but first we'll take a short 60 second break
[Unknown]: So it's been another great week on ivm where we try to get you the best podcasts that are around
[Unknown]: This week on the pragati podcast
[Unknown]: We have management and mint columnist karthik sashidhar who joins bhawan and hamsini to talk about elections and voting
[Unknown]: On junior one. We have samir pittalwala the founder of culture machine talking about streaming content online and at creations of tech
[Unknown]: His journey was setting up culture machine on ivm likes we have abbas janam and naveen talking about the meme culture
[Unknown]: On the vishal gundal show vishal welcomes vivek bhargav ceo of iprospect to communicate one of the foremost
[Unknown]: Digital advertising companies in the country on keeping it queer naveen interacts with queer filmmaker pradeep tarre who opens up about what it was
[Unknown]: Like to identify as trans in a culturally affluent household on who's your mommy?
[Unknown]: We tackle the weird advice literally everyone gives to new moms on cyrus says we have gauri devi dayal an ace entrepreneur
[Unknown]: Responsible for starting several awesome restaurants in bombay on sonology sonology a unique agony and call-in show
[Unknown]: So who helps his listeners on how to party train their dogs?
[Unknown]: It's been a great week on ivm and we hope that you can check out as many of these shows as you can
[Unknown]: And now let me get you onto your show
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm with nikhil a moderator at reddit
[Amit Varma]: Who is not only talking to me about the evolution of human conversations online in his experience?
[Amit Varma]: as a user of forums like usenet and later reddit, but
[Amit Varma]: Also from a point of view of what it's doing to us as a society and us as individuals
[Amit Varma]: But nikhil, let me take you back to the sort of the granular
[Guest]: Details of your life at reddit. What is a moderator's day like small clarification?
[Guest]: I wish I was on usenet but sadly I didn't have internet at that time. You were too young. I was too young, right?
[Guest]: So, uh, what day-to-day life on moderator? Yeah, what is it like? Very boring. We are the janitors of the world
[Guest]: And unfortunate and very strangely very powerful janitors according to a lot of people
[Guest]: So our first set of rules which we came up on our forum was generally don't do harm
[Guest]: So a lot of it was sort of going through a bunch of posts and a bunch of comments
[Guest]: And if we saw someone say something which was genuinely hurtful or untowards or basically hate speech or racism
[Guest]: We would remove it
[Guest]: And then if that person was a repeat user if they did it once or twice
[Amit Varma]: We would have to go so there is a way to see if the person has been has that comment deleted before
[Guest]: We can so at the infancy of reddit when moderating really started off. They weren't really a set of tools
[Guest]: So a lot of very interesting things that happened as a result of this there was
[Guest]: So one of the really cool things about subreddit one of its of reddit is subreddits
[Guest]: And I think that's one of its great contributions
[Guest]: To how we talk online so you can have a subreddit called r-pictures
[Guest]: And r-pictures has a lot of people and they were sharing everything and a lot of people started sharing cat pictures or memes
[Guest]: And those ended up dominating. So then what someone did is they created a separate subreddit for memes
[Guest]: And that took off and then the people at r-pics said if you're putting a meme you can't put it here put it there
[Guest]: So that split the load and that's a really fascinating thing which made it very easy
[Guest]: For these guys to do that before that you couldn't really do it as easily in a forum
[Guest]: You didn't have you either went to a different forum to discuss cat pictures and a different forum to discuss memes
[Guest]: Or you came to sub or came to reddit and then someone made a new subreddit to discuss
[Guest]: This memes in general and you could go there you could go and just see all of those things and this actually happened
[Guest]: So r-pics split up into other meme subreddits and those meme subreddits in turn split up into other subreddits
[Guest]: There's from there. There's actually a subreddit just dedicated to the insanity wolf meme
[Guest]: And there's another really interesting feature which used to be allowed initially which was when
[Guest]: People were not very happy with the moderators
[Guest]: They could just make another subreddit and then move en masse there
[Guest]: So this happened if I remember correctly it happened very famously to r-marijuana
[Guest]: So for some reason the moderator out there had some issues and the team and the users who were going there weren't too happy
[Guest]: So they moved en masse to r-trees
[Guest]: Which is why anytime you go to r-trees, it's not about plants
[Guest]: It's about a very specific type of herb
[Guest]: So what happened to the tree lovers? They moved to r-marijuana later on if I remember correctly
[Guest]: As I recall, I think that's what happened
[Amit Varma]: Right. So for a newcomer to reddit
[Guest]: This is all very confusing that you love trees and you want to go to r-marijuana. Yes, it is very much so
[Amit Varma]: Right, but isn't this also like on the one hand?
[Amit Varma]: This is very benign and very useful in the sense that okay
[Amit Varma]: You go from pics to memes and from memes to eternal wolf or whatever
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand it can also sort of drive people to ideological silos
[Guest]: Which is something that's kind of happened in the broader internet. Exactly
[Guest]: And so all of this possible even the movement of people to r-trees
[Guest]: Happened because we did not have a lot of moderating tools at that time
[Guest]: Right. So this is an example of one of the tensions which occurs for the need to be able to moderate and stop people talking
[Guest]: About or harming each other online and the freedom to expand into other things. Not all things are benign
[Guest]: I am generally in favor of moderating tools out of necessity
[Guest]: So one of the tools which we ended up which people not we but moderators in general ended up creating
[Guest]: Is a tool which helps them go through all the comments which are posted on a forum
[Guest]: There's a feed where you can see the newest comment and it would check for very specific keywords for example
[Guest]: Well niggers or other words, which would be very clear-cut
[Guest]: Attempts at hate speech so that way you would be flagged immediately that okay someone out here in your forum
[Guest]: So you only look at what's flagged?
[Guest]: Initially, we would try to look at on we would participate in a lot of things
[Guest]: But at a certain point of time we just had to just look at the queue
[Guest]: You have to look at what's flagged either by users or based on watch lists
[Guest]: For obvious keywords like i'm going to kill you or die and so on so forth
[Guest]: And of course racial slurs and so on and other similar words. So
[Guest]: It's always
[Guest]: About looking at that queue and quite often a lot of forums don't even have enough moderators to manage that
[Guest]: If it's a topic constrained forum where generally people aren't going to be talking about
[Guest]: Incendiary topics you should usually be able to manage the workload the higher the barrier to entry in that conversation
[Guest]: Usually the better the conversation because to get in
[Guest]: It's not that easy. You have to know what if you're going to talk about
[Guest]: um
[Guest]: Let's say a very complex game
[Guest]: For example, the only people who can play that game are people who've passed the barrier have the time and willingness to indulge themselves
[Guest]: In a certain level of effort everyone else out there is also spending the same amount of effort
[Guest]: So it's very easy to make out a faker or a poser or someone who's just talking about it
[Guest]: But doesn't know what he's talking about. So the conversation out there tends to be on topic and very neat
[Guest]: And that has a very nice sense of community
[Guest]: The other subreddits which tend to work out are ones which have very heavy moderation like ask history
[Guest]: Ask history has a dedicated team of volunteer people with backgrounds in specific parts of history and they are
[Guest]: Educators teachers master holders and phd holders on those topics
[Guest]: So any time of any question that is asked and only as far as I remember only questions can be asked
[Guest]: Can be asked the first response has to be a qualified and informed response with sourcing
[Guest]: So you can ask whatever question and you will usually get a good answer
[Guest]: If you go in there to just make jokes about oh, you know
[Guest]: Well, the pyramids were made by aliens comments like that disappear
[Guest]: They immediately removed and the only thing which remains is high quality conversation
[Amit Varma]: So in the sense they are also doing what my friend Manish used to do at sepia mutiny
[Amit Varma]: They're banning for stupidity that particular subreddit. Yes, or to be put a finer point on it
[Guest]: They're banning noise
[Guest]: They have a very clear-cut definition of signal and there's a very easy way to say this is signal
[Guest]: Because it's a very limited topic generally when you have a limited topic, you can do a good job
[Guest]: For example, you're talking about music and you're talking about a specific type of music or how to play a specific instrument
[Guest]: That would usually work a lot better unless you suddenly got into a war about which musician you like over the other
[Guest]: Those are different but even there the moderators can step in and say we're not going to really have a fight on these topics
[Guest]: You can move it to someplace else
[Amit Varma]: so it seems to me that one of the real problems with the moving away from reddit for just a moment because the question
[Amit Varma]: occurred to me is that
[Amit Varma]: Uh, this becomes a problem at scale when you don't have specific subjects
[Amit Varma]: For example with facebook
[Amit Varma]: I imagine how the moderation is that everyone who flags something that goes into some kind of queue and they have like
[Amit Varma]: Uh, they have some call center somewhere where they have thousand two thousand people just sitting at comms and one after the other these images
[Amit Varma]: Flash up and they're all general. They're not specific
[Amit Varma]: So it's not like a knowledge-based thing like ask history where the guidelines are clear
[Amit Varma]: You ban this you don't ban that and they have to make subjective calls based on general guidelines
[Amit Varma]: And there is often very little recourse available because if they if they delete something they delete something
[Amit Varma]: How does that work and what are the ways around that?
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Yeah, I completely agree with you where the more subjective it is the more difficult it is and when we're talking about subjective at facebook
[Guest]: Scale we're talking about what's subjective in one part of india and what's no subjective in america and india and america alone have very different
[Guest]: Concepts legally about what is free and what is fair what is okay speech like the term chinky eyes would be interpreted differently
[Amit Varma]: By someone here and someone in minnesota, for example, so, you know
[Guest]: yeah, and out and what you tend to see is that there's a sort of cross-pollination that
[Guest]: All of those that if you're using any of those words we you tend to say, okay, maybe that person's racist
[Guest]: It may not be it it is
[Guest]: Quite often and now it's the de jure to assume that's racist, right?
[Guest]: So while back in the day, maybe it was not now it is so there's also a sort of
[Guest]: Effect where people are learning what cultural norms exist in other places
[Guest]: And online is sort of being transplanted also to other nations in other countries sometimes for the better sometimes just
[Amit Varma]: It's an alien entrant because what i'd imagine is from what you describe of reddit
[Amit Varma]: Is that the way the moderators work on different subreddits and so on is something that's evolved over a period of many many years
[Guest]: Very much learning and discussion and tool and tool creation. We did not like so
[Guest]: Basically people end up blocking mentions of certain subreddits. So if that old moderator on uh,
[Guest]: That particular subreddit or marijuana had these tools. He could basically block all mention of our trees
[Guest]: So no one would know it would exist. Wow
[Guest]: So it would be it would have to be done through various roundabout methods. It would be much harder
[Guest]: So it's not it's a lot harder for people to move with their feet
[Guest]: And this is an example of where there's a tension between the creation of tools to make it easier for people to deal with
[Guest]: basically assholes
[Guest]: And how those tools end up
[Guest]: Inadvertently stopping expansion into other spaces and here's the thing
[Amit Varma]: It's this is something that's evolved over a period of time into a kind of science at reddit where you have all these years
[Amit Varma]: Of collective experience and you've reached certain ways of working in certain norms in the moderating community at reddit
[Amit Varma]: But what companies like facebook and twitter and so on are having to do is just to set rules on the fly and just deal
[Amit Varma]: with shit on the fly without
[Amit Varma]: You know having these years and years of processes
[Guest]: I would say that making shit up on the fly is basically the rule
[Guest]: It's if you have the time you go read up on
[Guest]: The rules of what free speech are or like what some court cases you go and educate yourself
[Guest]: But in general everyone's making this shit up on the fly and at the end of the day, I think what's deciding it is
[Guest]: What works?
[Guest]: So for a lot of people it just they can't manage conversations
[Guest]: They just remove it for a lot of other people. It's just constant banning and removal of conversations which do not match
[Guest]: The stated purpose of the forum which results in what you'd mentioned silos. So for example, there's a very large forum dedicated to
[Guest]: uh, the current sitting president of the united states of america with the donald and
[Guest]: for a very long time they figured out ways in which
[Guest]: They could make sure that their topics showed up on the front page
[Guest]: So that everyone else on the forum had to watch it and they were quite pleased with being able to do that
[Guest]: Eventually reddit changed the entire way the front page algorithm worked to prevent users from ganging together and gaming the front page
[Guest]: So one of the issues over here is that the donald which is the name of the subreddit
[Guest]: Over there. They if you are critical of the president they remove you
[Guest]: Conversely other subreddits now notice if you have posted in the donald and then they remove you for just interacting in that space
[Guest]: So even if it is a question
[Guest]: Innocuously stated that you know, why is he doing this? You will find yourself banned from several other subreddits
[Guest]: They will just say you are not allowed to speak here
[Guest]: It's a very strange evolution of
[Guest]: Group warfare which has occurred because of this this echo chamber effect
[Guest]: I don't even know how to explain or understand this particular
[Amit Varma]: So the the social scientist cast sunstein a kind of term group polarization
[Amit Varma]: And what they did was I think he and his colleagues did a study where they got a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: republicans and
[Amit Varma]: Democrats kind of together and they took their positions on a variety of issues
[Amit Varma]: And then they put them together in with like-minded people and they also put them together in mixed groups
[Amit Varma]: And they found that those who were
[Amit Varma]: Huddled together with like-minded people all of them tended to grow more
[Amit Varma]: All of them tended to grow more extreme in their opinion
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: Than the other groups and what this did was that it?
[Amit Varma]: And when we form echo chambers, we essentially then interact only with like-minded people whose ideas already match us
[Amit Varma]: The confirmation bias kicks in where we ignore all ideas from outside and we only take in the news that conforms to our biases
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: These groups get further and further apart. And finally you find that
[Amit Varma]: Uh in society, we are not talking to each other anymore. We are talking past each other. We are abusing each other
[Amit Varma]: I mean one of my constant complaints is that
[Amit Varma]: Why political discourse is pretty much finished on social media
[Amit Varma]: Especially twitter is that all argument comes down to attacking the person and not the argument
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand and on the other hand virtue signaling to raise your status within your own in group
[Amit Varma]: Rather than honestly trying to engage with the other side, right?
[Guest]: So it's a lot of just throwing headlines at each other
[Guest]: You're not really talking to the other person you want to show to the rest of your team
[Guest]: Look that guy's an idiot. I am so great. I've made him shut up. That's generally the point
[Guest]: it's so the echo chamber effect is very insidious and this is something which
[Guest]: Again, this is about the frontier constantly moving as we improve on our tools and improve on our ways to deal with communication
[Guest]: We find new and new effects which we didn't intend
[Guest]: So reddit had a really simple way back then you could just upvote a topic and you would see lots of interesting conversations
[Guest]: And now because so many people ended up using that for their own gain
[Guest]: So they would create they would try to spam or they would try to control conversations or they would just try to
[Guest]: Be power users or just be the most the one to make the funniest comment
[Guest]: There were constant rules and changes to the way the algorithm works to make it more complex
[Guest]: While that has had positive benefits
[Guest]: One of the side effects is that now it's just enhanced the echo chamber effect you tend to go to your group
[Guest]: And then in your group you only argue about the things which you have already decided and anytime someone else says something different
[Guest]: That person is immediately chucked out. It's it's really
[Guest]: It's really creating a very disheartening situation
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that this is not something necessarily brought about by the internet or by technology, but this is a human characteristic
[Amit Varma]: characteristic that is amplified by technology like technology amplifies both the best and the worst and
[Amit Varma]: It enables both our best and worst instincts and this tendency to think tribalistically and to form these sort of silos
[Amit Varma]: Is something that is inherent but that is now being enabled by technology
[Amit Varma]: and therefore it becomes
[Amit Varma]: Problematic and complex to give it a moral dimension and to say that no things should not be like this. So I think I
[Guest]: I don't remember the full argument. My personal gut take is that this is because of technology
[Guest]: that inherently
[Guest]: This is a new way for human beings to be with each other
[Guest]: And the problems it causes are inherently because of the medium
[Guest]: So I think this is a much faster cycle. You get your comments you get your responses a lot quicker and it's also
[Guest]: very context poor
[Guest]: So like when i'm talking to you guys and I can see all of you all I can see whether you're interested bored tired cold
[Guest]: It gives me a lot of information on what your state of mind is
[Guest]: But if i'm and by making eye contact I can also figure out I can also
[Guest]: Understand your body language. You can understand mine
[Guest]: You can show so many things our brains are really well designed for dealing with other people
[Guest]: Our music our dance our entire culture is about that but online
[Guest]: You just see what's written. You don't know the tone. You don't know the background
[Guest]: You don't know whether the person is a angry person sad person and he's had a bad day
[Guest]: Whether someone has beat him up or not. You don't know any of that. You just take that concept
[Guest]: And then you try to interpret it and in a context poem system
[Guest]: We tend to put a lot more other information on it to try to understand it
[Guest]: And that tends to cause a very different set of interactions and behavior
[Guest]: The other aspect is that this stuff is fast
[Guest]: It's like the worst combinations sometimes of having a book
[Guest]: And having an argument. A book you can open up and you can always read that page. You can close the book go back and forget it
[Guest]: A conversation you can have once or twice and then you can say something in anger
[Guest]: And then leave and everyone will forget it
[Guest]: But an online conversation you can say something angry and you can put it out there in that moment of anger
[Guest]: And then everyone will read it like a book and they will come back to it
[Guest]: And this is actually something which people would use to like remind people
[Guest]: Oh, you said this back then and then they would bring that post up and they would say don't listen to this person because
[Guest]: Once upon a time he said something which was bad about xyz person
[Amit Varma]: This is a screenshot culture on twitter where you'll put up a screenshot from
[Guest]: 2012 and yeah, yeah, yeah
[Amit Varma]: Which is sometimes useful in the case of politicians because you find that most of the best criticisms against Modi
[Amit Varma]: For example have been made by Modi himself, right, you know
[Amit Varma]: Back in the past on questions of principles and not talking to the press and so on and so forth
[Guest]: So on and so forth
[Guest]: But that's also another aspect about change, right?
[Guest]: All of us say something which later on we can regret or we can change but
[Guest]: Because of the nature of the written word and the way we are used to at least the older generation is used to looking at
[Guest]: It is that it's something more final but over here
[Guest]: It's sort of the it can be quite often the worst of both worlds
[Amit Varma]: And also I forget where I read. This is one of these social science
[Amit Varma]: Studies one of those behavioral econ things. I forget exactly
[Amit Varma]: Which study it is but the thing is if you can get someone to commit to something in writing
[Amit Varma]: They are more likely to carry out their promise
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you you know, and and it strikes me just thinking aloud that if someone
[Amit Varma]: For whatever reasons ends up saying something in a moment of anger just because it's there permanently
[Amit Varma]: They then feel compelled to double down and defend it and that changes their character itself
[Amit Varma]: They become a different person because of what they might have said in a moment of anger
[Guest]: Which they would otherwise have forgotten exactly
[Guest]: So this is why like as to your point whether this is just human tendency. I think that this is not just human tendency
[Guest]: I think this is very much
[Guest]: The new world we live in and it's very much because of technology and because it's been designed
[Guest]: let's not forget that all of these systems are designed for maximum engagement because
[Guest]: Just because if you don't have people on your forum and you don't have people on your website for long enough
[Guest]: You're not going to have enough advertisers
[Guest]: You're not going to have enough people being attracted then this is
[Guest]: Related to the previous problem where we had our news cycles being very fast or if anyone's seen
[Guest]: Indian television, you'll know what the news cycle is on steroids. Everyone is shouting at each other for no reason
[Guest]: We may all argue and we may all at the same time hold the same opinion, but we will fight
[Amit Varma]: Boss, what kind of guy are you you're moderating reddit comments by day and you're watching indian news television by night. No, no
[Unknown]: How do you live?
[Guest]: How are you sane
[Guest]: I mean the answer i'm quite no i'm not quite sane
[Guest]: But no i've there's I can only take so much of dangerous cancerous objects at a time. I chose reddit
[Guest]: But yeah
[Guest]: That's generally the trend what was okay in our previous world of television and books and arguing it's not okay online
[Amit Varma]: I'd actually say now sure technology is enabled all this and turbocharged all this but I think all these I disagree
[Guest]: I'd say it's created. It's not enabled enabled
[Amit Varma]: Enabled is I think the wrong word. See i'll tell you what I mean one thing for example
[Amit Varma]: I think you'd agree with me is that the world is becoming more and more tribal
[Amit Varma]: And we've always in terms of instinct the tribalistic instinct has always been there
[Amit Varma]: It's only now that technology has brought it about so that we find more and more of these
[Amit Varma]: finely honed
[Amit Varma]: Sort of tribes which nevertheless have scale because we can reach out to anyone else in the world
[Amit Varma]: For example who may hate mongoose?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and and so all these all the people who hate our keto
[Amit Varma]: Down with our keto down with our keto. Yeah, I mean I I've had heated arguments online with people about keto and
[Amit Varma]: You know, which is on the face of it completely bizarre because you know, you eat what you eat
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, would you argue in real life?
[Guest]: I think there's so many stupid things which are so the amount the ability for stupid topics to become massive points of fracture
[Guest]: Is absurd i'm i'm actually seeing in some forums that there's a growing north-south divide between india itself with something
[Guest]: Which I didn't I literally saw grow out of nothing
[Guest]: And now because it's there it's online there's data which can back up both opinions and people who are angry about something
[Guest]: It's going to grow you give a fracture point and you allow people a topic on which they can have different opinions
[Guest]: The internet will go to work helping
[Guest]: Separate those groups and make those new echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: Well, i'm just going to say that bombay is out of this north-south debate because we get the worst of it
[Amit Varma]: The south thinks we are in the north and the north thinks we're in the south. So no one no
[Guest]: No, what you're saying? Bombay is broken up between north and south
[Amit Varma]: We've had that running feud going on since when that's internally
[Amit Varma]: Like another aspect which I think is an aspect of human nature
[Amit Varma]: But the internet amplifies is a performative aspect in the sense that we are all putting on an act for others all the time
[Amit Varma]: And we're trying to show ourselves as noble or knowledgeable or whatever
[Amit Varma]: Every action of ours in some sense is an act of signaling
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the internet allows you to do that on a massive scale to the point that I think everyone on twitter today
[Amit Varma]: Is just performing. No one's actually communicating. Forget twitter. I want from what I see on other people's facebook
[Guest]: I want their facebook life. I don't want their real life. I want their facebook. Yeah, exactly
[Guest]: Everything is happy. Everyone's birthday is remembered holidays are the best the food is the greatest
[Guest]: And you only show up when you had a great day
[Guest]: I know exactly and and and I think the mistake people made I think uh
[Amit Varma]: was it um
[Amit Varma]: There's a great book called. Um, everybody lies by noah stevens david owens
[Amit Varma]: If you've heard of it where he talks about where he essentially looks at
[Amit Varma]: Millions of google searches and social media searches and all that and finds out what people are really like aside from their performative aspects
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very striking line in that. I don't know if he's quoting someone or he's saying this himself
[Amit Varma]: But there's a very striking line of how people tend to compare their real lives with other people's facebook lives
[Guest]: Yeah, and it's it's a source of such pain and angst
[Guest]: It's like keeping up with the joneses but on steroids and it's not just the joneses who live next to you
[Guest]: It's the joneses, you've known all through your life
[Guest]: Everyone but the flip side is i've gained new skills
[Amit Varma]: I am officially the best selfie taker in bombay, which would never have happened
[Amit Varma]: Had there not been a performative side to me also, but but to get back to this, I mean, this is
[Amit Varma]: Really a subject far more serious than I think either of us even know how to express
[Amit Varma]: Because what is happening in the world is that politics everywhere is becoming more and more tribal people have stopped talking to each other
[Amit Varma]: No news is real news. All news is in some way or the other fake news in a sense
[Amit Varma]: We are all living in our imagined universes and feeding
[Amit Varma]: Basically, there's so much information coming at which point do you just give up and say forget it?
[Guest]: Yeah, let someone else make the decisions because I really can't make out the signal from the noise what mitigates this
[Guest]: What medicates this or what can mitigate this what I really don't know
[Guest]: Because even just discussing this topic, there's so many things being left out about changes and in the way even a simple site like reddit works
[Guest]: I think the only thing that mitigates this is what one of my friends did. So he's really balanced chap
[Guest]: He's got a great sense of humor. He's generally as a person
[Guest]: He's a really good person and he's still not a pushover or anything. He's just generally very nice
[Guest]: He I spoke to him one day. I was like, dude, you know what's happening and so on so forth
[Guest]: He basically said he's cut off. He's shut down all his social media channels
[Guest]: He's off of social media. He really doesn't care what his friends are doing and he's spending his time practicing guitar doing his work
[Guest]: He has just cut off and that was the first time I saw a ray of hope
[Guest]: On how to deal with this and that's strength from one individual
[Guest]: I think most of us are frankly just addicted to the dopamine rush of the next notification
[Amit Varma]: And it takes a lot of willpower to cut off and most people just go with the flow and they don't do it
[Amit Varma]: Well, we're going to figure something out because as you said, it's a dopamine rush
[Guest]: But at the end of the day the other analogy to look at all of this interaction online, it's like going to gym
[Guest]: It's about healthy conversations and healthy habits and
[Guest]: How many of us eat healthy and how many of us at the start of the year decide we are going to go to gym?
[Guest]: And we're going to be the best person version of ourselves. We can be i'm going to exercise
[Guest]: I'm going to make sure i'm disciplined and i'm going to make sure i'm better and happier with myself. Those are the same
[Guest]: Issues which you find online. It's not that everyone just generally a lot of people aren't really happy when they abuse someone
[Guest]: I mean at the end of the day, they may say okay that guy deserved it
[Guest]: And another aspect is that I would rather have constructive conversations
[Guest]: Or I would rather be part of constructive and educational conversations and not either waste time or eat intellectual junk food
[Guest]: Now, so the question is
[Guest]: One, eventually when do any of these things happen?
[Guest]: So the question is one eventually when do does everyone recognize that there is a certain sort of gym for the mind?
[Guest]: Or certain habits which we have to inculcate as normal users of the internet in the way we interact so that
[Guest]: We don't cause harm to ourselves. We have good conversations and we make others around us happy
[Guest]: And two when are we going to find the self-discipline to do that?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I know your earlier question about new year resolutions was rhetorical but this new year
[Amit Varma]: I made a resolution that I would I do a life hack basically
[Amit Varma]: And in the four months since then thanks to a certain subreddit and I think you know, which one i'm talking about
[Amit Varma]: I've lost 15 kgs since the start of january. We're in may right now. So the keto subreddit on no, I don't
[Amit Varma]: particularly go there much but I think it's an incredible subreddit and I'd
[Amit Varma]: heartily recommend it to anyone who wants to
[Amit Varma]: Get their lives together. But again one like there's a guy called adam alter who wrote a very good book called irresistible
[Amit Varma]: About how people are hooked to technology all the time
[Amit Varma]: Including a lot of social media and there are apparently apps you can download
[Amit Varma]: Which will tell you how often you look at the phone in a day and the average person picks up their phone every seventh minute
[Amit Varma]: Once every seven minutes of the waking day not when they're sleeping though
[Amit Varma]: And most people don't realize how hooked they are to all of this
[Amit Varma]: And therefore these constant distractions of these notifications prevent them from doing any kind of deep work deep thinking introspection
[Amit Varma]: discovering other offline joys
[Amit Varma]: we've all kind of
[Amit Varma]: Become slaves to the internet and it's it's easy enough to understand this at a rational level and say that. Yeah
[Guest]: I'm going to uninstall
[Guest]: But it's very hard to actually do it. You always exactly so as someone who has repeatedly failed using these apps
[Guest]: My sincere advice is that they will come a time when you actually genuinely want it only download the app then
[Guest]: Because eventually what will happen is that when you use these apps you figure out a way to work around these apps
[Guest]: So when you're serious download them and use it for the first time
[Guest]: Because once you figure out a way around it, then the charm becomes a lot
[Guest]: Their charm decreases then it becomes a straight-up test of willpower
[Guest]: Anyway that particular insight aside from someone who has tried and failed
[Guest]: I think there's a lot of there while there are what you have done is very positive in general
[Guest]: If you are self-directed and you are able to focus then yes, there's a lot of stuff you can get online
[Guest]: But other than that the internet is designed
[Guest]: In many ways to deal with our
[Guest]: Weak spots in our mental heuristics like in the way our brain works. We know a lot of research
[Guest]: We know even before modern like google and everyone else showed up
[Guest]: We already knew a lot about how people behave with colors with stimulation and we'd done like the first basic piece of research
[Guest]: Found that if people are not on your website for more than a few seconds
[Guest]: They're gone. Like if you're not engaging them in the first few seconds, they're gone and that's it
[Guest]: Your site is dead. And so even basic websites back in the html days from that time onwards they have been
[Guest]: Constantly evolving to be so lovely. So just genuinely smooth buttery smooth on your phone
[Guest]: Quick responsive pleasant to look at all of these things just so that they can engage you because
[Guest]: And here we can discuss the economics of it and whatnot
[Guest]: But let's just just focus on how these websites are designed
[Guest]: Websites and most of the programs today are using a full arsenal of psychological and technological tools to keep you there
[Guest]: I frankly think most people are unaware of it. I don't think most people are prepared
[Guest]: I'm certain that in any one kilometer 10 kilometer radius around you anywhere in the world. There'll only be maybe
[Guest]: 0.1 percent of the people who know what tools are being used against you. I I absolutely agree even less than that
[Amit Varma]: So let me pose you a thought experiment with two questions
[Amit Varma]: Supposing somebody i've heard some version of this perhaps from robert nozick. I forget
[Amit Varma]: Uh, so i'm afraid I can't attribute the original because i've just forgotten but supposing someone creates a pleasure machine
[Amit Varma]: Right now the pleasure machine the end of humanity is there
[Amit Varma]: No, no, so the pleasure machine is an advanced machine which which puts electrodes in your brain and everything
[Amit Varma]: And then you're no longer in the real world. You are in this
[Amit Varma]: Artificial world, which is one of your own designing where only good things happen to you and you're
[Amit Varma]: 24 7 for the rest of your life. You're in this extremely pleasurable experience and you can design that experience
[Amit Varma]: It is whatever you want it to be
[Amit Varma]: One would you say that that's a good thing for society if everyone has one like that and two
[Amit Varma]: Would you yourself opt for it?
[Amit Varma]: And an honest answer because the obvious answer if you're being
[Unknown]: If you're being performative the answer is no I want to live the real life
[Amit Varma]: I want to go to the fields and so on and so forth, but what's what are what are we after?
[Guest]: As human beings I have an I love sketching. I have an active imagination from my child
[Guest]: So any fantasy world I create will be extremely meticulously created to keep me very happy
[Guest]: I think you put that thing on my head once i'm done building it
[Guest]: You wouldn't get me out of it. I would fight for my life for my right to be completely and utterly befuddled and why not?
[Guest]: You've just described heaven. You've described see the only thing limited what will happen is that
[Guest]: Fortunately, I don't think anyone can create a machine of that level of sophistication
[Guest]: Because that level of detail will always be difficult. But what you'll have is your brain will give the detail
[Amit Varma]: You uh, you'll just everything I know about basically about people's ability to be very precise in defining
[Guest]: A world is poor, but what will happen instead is that people will start with the first minecraft like worlds
[Guest]: Then they'll share it with each other and then there's someone will start and over a few months and years
[Guest]: You will get worlds of increasing sophistication and finally all of that the community of those creators will just go inside and never come out
[Guest]: And why not that's a perfect world and isn't that the world being created for us?
[Amit Varma]: It's not exactly a pleasure machine, but it's more like a
[Amit Varma]: A numbness machine where you know people can browse facebook for hours or you know
[Guest]: People can browse facebook for hours or look at it for hours
[Guest]: So a different perspective on this is i'm a gamer and one of the reasons why
[Guest]: Uh, i'm aware of a lot of these tools is because they've increasingly been put into games
[Guest]: But there's one gaming company nintendo which builds games with a very different with a very familial
[Guest]: Focus focus on the family and how to interact and a lot of their games are a lot
[Guest]: They feel healthier like they created the wii initially and that was a different way to interact with games
[Guest]: I mean generally speaking people don't like playing getting up and moving around your calories are used in your thumb
[Guest]: Any more and why the hell you could just go out to a dance class
[Guest]: But they built that because I assume at some level they felt that would be an interesting way to get people to work together
[Guest]: so there is a certain sort of
[Guest]: Outlook and mindset you can have when designing these products which is not built on the old silicon valley
[Guest]: Network effect or you must absorb everyone into your network
[Guest]: Which is more human and humane or at least that's my hope
[Guest]: There's a way to look at it and say that you know
[Guest]: I'm going to prioritize values which are more about interacting and making it easier for people to interact
[Guest]: So maybe the material will be slower
[Guest]: Maybe the material will be less flashy
[Guest]: Maybe it won't use the fastest engine in the world or the fastest chip and it's not going to be that maybe it's not
[Guest]: Going to be made out of magnesium and chrome, but i'm focusing on
[Guest]: Meaningful ways for or tools for which which with which people can interact and build their own
[Guest]: Stories and their own things
[Guest]: I think at this point of time we had to discuss a little bit about the dynamics of the
[Guest]: Economy behind a lot of the large firms which are influencing us
[Guest]: Fortunately, a lot of these firms like google facebook genuinely at some level want to do well for the world
[Guest]: Unfortunately at some level they are not going to because they need to deal with their shareholders
[Guest]: To deal with their shareholders and they need to compete and that means keeping people on their platforms
[Amit Varma]: What would doing good with the world mean in the context of google and facebook make their products less addictive?
[Guest]: I think in their terms it would be
[Guest]: One you could say make their products less addictive
[Guest]: But that doesn't really solve the problem because then that'll just bring someone else up and say hey, you know
[Amit Varma]: What look at my new shiny addictive app
[Guest]: Right. So then it would be about the next step of responsibility
[Guest]: Which would be deploying the amount of people and work required to ensuring that this is customized for a lot of things
[Guest]: and frankly, I think that's beyond the scope of most firms and beyond the scope of what most markets and most
[Guest]: Shareholders really expect of their firm. That's quite often a role for governments
[Guest]: and for people to decide so
[Amit Varma]: That's very hard and I think I think the aspect of it, which I have sort of difficulty in reconciling
[Amit Varma]: I'm, not sure how I feel about it. Uh, tell me what you think is that
[Amit Varma]: Here are you and I sitting and making a judgment of these kind of behaviors on the part of firms are bad for society
[Amit Varma]: But then the point is that as long as all actions are voluntary
[Amit Varma]: If there are a million people sitting in their homes who want what facebook is giving them who want that numbness who want that addiction
[Amit Varma]: Who don't mind that uh, who don't mind that being in echo chambers and not communicating with the rest of the world
[Amit Varma]: Then what right does someone have to get in the way coercively? So I think let's move back a lot ideologically
[Guest]: So this ideologically speaking is I am an individual. I have a choice over my right
[Guest]: What right do you have over deciding me? And I think this is a great ideology if you lived alone
[Guest]: In especially in a country like india, which is as crowded. So if you had like infinite, I actually disagree
[Amit Varma]: It's it's an irrelevant ideology if you live alone, but if you live in society
[Amit Varma]: This is the only ideology which can actually safeguard everybody if you pay attention to consent and if you fight coercion
[Guest]: I think we're lucky to be in india in that sense
[Guest]: because while
[Guest]: In india, you very clear clearly live in a society where that's not the founding father's intent belief or system and there is such a
[Guest]: massive
[Guest]: Amount of ideology online and words online which find roots in the old school american types in the well not old school modern
[Guest]: modern
[Guest]: thoughts which
[Guest]: Permeate america or used to permeate online conversations if you're within that particular subset of people
[Guest]: So I think I've grown to appreciate
[Guest]: how you can manage to
[Guest]: Have speech have a working functional marketplace
[Guest]: Without having to go for massive and utterly completely unfettered speech
[Amit Varma]: Uh, leaving leaving speech aside for a moment once you agree in principle that the government
[Amit Varma]: Uh should be able to impose certain preferences on people coercively
[Amit Varma]: Then how are you to decide what preferences those should be?
[Amit Varma]: So then it comes around to your saying that hey, you know
[Amit Varma]: Amit and me are wise and we will decide and these things are bad for society. I know why not someone else
[Amit Varma]: I know better than you it comes around to that. It's much better to let individuals make their own choices
[Guest]: While once upon a time, I would have been sitting on the other side of this conversation
[Guest]: The point is that someone is making a decision
[Guest]: Anyway, you don't decide it and you don't have responsible people and a judge jury
[Guest]: laws behind it
[Guest]: Then some random dude in a suit is going to make it because they have to and that decision is being made
[Guest]: By me and many other moderators every day because it's necessity. It's a part of your volunteer work
[Amit Varma]: So what you and your fellow moderators do is in no way an issue for me
[Amit Varma]: It's not even a free speech issue because it's reddit as a private company
[Guest]: but that's just a but that's a distinction based upon a very
[Guest]: See if we forget about private and public those at some point of time
[Guest]: They're useful as solid concepts and sometimes they're just a dodge. They're just sort of a
[Guest]: Superficial fig leaf when we're actually looking at the mechanisms
[Guest]: Not always not always but if you're actually looking at the working
[Guest]: Of that ecosystem if you're looking and seeing how whether actual ideas get across i am bothered
[Guest]: That in some ways moderators if they go rogue can end up shutting down entire portions of the kind of a lot of harm
[Amit Varma]: But i'll tell you what, I mean
[Amit Varma]: I look at the world through the prism of consent or the other side of that coin coercion. Now, the thing is that
[Amit Varma]: If a reddit moderator bans me if I say something, uh
[Amit Varma]: Then it's bye-bye. Yeah, then it's bye-bye, but it's fine. It's it's voluntary
[Amit Varma]: I can go somewhere else but if the indian government strikes down on my free speech, I I can't go anywhere else
[Amit Varma]: I'm forced. I mean that is absolute coercion. I go to reddit out of my choice
[Amit Varma]: But I am not under the indian state out of my choice. There is coercion there
[Amit Varma]: Uh, and that is and and that's why the whole question of private and public is not a semantic issue
[Amit Varma]: It's an it's an issue that goes back to first principles
[Amit Varma]: So for me anything that involves coercion is wrong
[Amit Varma]: And if something doesn't involve coercion, then the question has to be asked very seriously. Why is this wrong?
[Guest]: Is it just your judgment fair enough now? So let's there's two problems with the way the current internet is laid out
[Guest]: For that particular thing. So one of them is competition, right the
[Guest]: The you know about the network effect, right?
[Guest]: Of course the basic value of a network or a group of people is whether they have how many people they have on it
[Guest]: That tends to mean that most snapchat reddit facebook twitter are one of a kind. There's no competition, right?
[Guest]: So if you're not on that place, you're nowhere
[Guest]: Yeah, that means that you're you're fundamentally your opinions have been silenced
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the counter view to that which in fact if you heard my episode with your namesake nikhil pawar
[Amit Varma]: Where he brought up the same point and the counter view to that is yeah sure it seems in terms of a social network
[Amit Varma]: There's only facebook in terms of you know
[Amit Varma]: A certain kind of forum or community there's only reddit and they're behemoths and it's a network affected play
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand they are all competing they are all competing with everything else a person may be able to do with their
[Amit Varma]: Time so if I feel after a while
[Amit Varma]: That facebook is wasting too much of my time or they're not giving me value
[Guest]: I can read a book I can go all of these things are optimized
[Guest]: As again that comes back to the point of what they're optimizing for all of them are using behavior. They're using basic
[Guest]: Reinforcement schedules you will always get a dopamine hit. Now. You'll have a random period of time. It'll get another dopamine hit
[Guest]: They're all designed to make sure that your interactions are of a certain nature
[Guest]: Which is generally fast and smooth so it gets to that particular sector. So even if there's competition
[Guest]: It's not really competition for hearing that you're it's not that you're going to be heard
[Amit Varma]: You're saying they've turned us into sheep and we don't really have a choice
[Amit Varma]: So the whole concept of I mean the consent really doesn't apply here. Is that what you're saying?
[Guest]: I'm saying that consent that's a very hard statement to take and considering how subtle these effects are for
[Guest]: It's very easy to take make that statement. It's very hard to back it up with hard facts
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not even disputing it. I'm not asking you to bucket. I'm not disputing it
[Amit Varma]: No
[Guest]: But if you're if you're going to be honest about our positions and if you're going to make that effort to go to that
[Guest]: Mental gym, we have to start with making these really fine distinctions. No, but here's the thing. I am completely okay
[Amit Varma]: Taking what you say is what I say that yes, we are all manipulated and we are in fact
[Amit Varma]: I don't believe in free will but that's a different philosophical
[Amit Varma]: That's a different philosophical argument, but but the question is that yes
[Amit Varma]: We are being manipulated and we are much less in control of actions and we think
[Amit Varma]: The tough question to me which I can't get around and i'm not even saying that a is the answer or b is the answer
[Amit Varma]: The tough question to me is that I am fundamentally against coercion because I think coercion
[Amit Varma]: Is toxic to society and you don't want to give anybody that power
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is that if you want to solve this the only solution that people keep coming up with
[Amit Varma]: That nikhil came up with for example
[Amit Varma]: uh was not you nikhil was the government should step in and it's almighty wisdom and
[Amit Varma]: You know regulate these companies and that's the only option
[Amit Varma]: I think that's the worst possible option because you can always assume that the government will be taken over by interest groups of one
[Amit Varma]: Kind or the other and I think there has to be some
[Amit Varma]: other way forward
[Amit Varma]: And and do you see hope of some other way forward emerging in the sense that after this cambridge analytical scandal with facebook
[Amit Varma]: A lot of people though possibly it's a selection bias on our part because we know those kinds of people
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of people did a quit facebook thing and uninstalled it
[Amit Varma]: uh
[Amit Varma]: Do you see something like that happening over a period of time as people realize that it's harming the richness of their lives?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you think that it's a fait accompli?
[Guest]: I think the
[Guest]: The way the question is laid out. It's very easy to answer. I think it's very easy to say. It's a fait accompli
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: I think everyone who's listening everyone who's used got a mobile phone
[Guest]: Has facebook installed and they know how many times they're going to look at it
[Guest]: Or how many times they're going to go on whatsapp and see the same forward come around according to adam
[Guest]: Walter they actually underestimate how often they will look at it, but they know yeah, right
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: I think that it is fate
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: you are
[Guest]: On that little black piece of metal you have in your pocket
[Guest]: There are lists and sits the collective ability of every marketer that has ever lived every psychologist that has ever lived every programmer
[Guest]: That has ever ever lived and it's there to find your mental weak spots
[Guest]: To find that moment when you are willing to change an idea when you're willing to engage in something else. I think
[Guest]: That device is built by people smarter than you who have been paid to be that smart
[Guest]: And it's designed to beat you or not necessarily beat you. It's designed by people who are hoping to help you
[Guest]: But unfortunately our way of defining this help
[Guest]: so far
[Guest]: Has ended up having lots of unforeseen or foreseeable side effects, which people went ahead with anyway
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: The private industry as a whole has followed the incentives correctly
[Guest]: And has explored this new territory and we have found that what genies we have left out of this bottle
[Guest]: Are not going to go back and that leaves very precious little behavior, which we can control
[Guest]: So in the same way, which we today look at obesity and we look at junk food
[Guest]: I think eventually it's sooner rather than later
[Guest]: We are going to have to deal with this
[Guest]: The question is whether we have to deal with this in the manner, which we talk about junk food
[Guest]: Or whether we talk about in the manner we discuss cocaine
[Guest]: That's the main issue
[Guest]: Now the problem is that cocaine and junk food are on a very simple spectrum stuff we ingest
[Guest]: These are ideas. We are talking about
[Guest]: News of fake material put out there to affect the way
[Guest]: Countries function, which is the most recent thing. But before that we were talking about harassment
[Guest]: There's been a very innovative way which moderators were harassed recently for
[Guest]: When avengers released people started putting spoilers of avengers
[Guest]: Spoilers of avengers infinity war all over the place, right?
[Guest]: And since you're now that in that will always hurt moderators more because the moment you see it you're like crap spoiler block
[Guest]: But every mod who comes back to that thread
[Guest]: We'll see the spoiler because those while it's blocked for normal users
[Guest]: Everyone else all the other mods can see it. They can see all the other comments which have been removed
[Guest]: You can always review what's happened and for all the users who didn't know you could do this. You've now told them well done
[Amit Varma]: Hey Bhagwan cancel remove
[Amit Varma]: We shall censor this portion, right?
[Amit Varma]: but we were broadly talking about online conversations and the way uh,
[Amit Varma]: we as society the way we interact with each other has changed because of uh,
[Amit Varma]: Changed actually in front of our eyes in our in our uh, yeah, very fast respective lifespans
[Amit Varma]: Uh, so i'm going to end the episode by i'm asking you two questions. So you've struck a note of
[Amit Varma]: Despair in this but the two questions I tend to ask my guests before they leave
[Amit Varma]: Uh in in the context of the subject is what makes you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: About um the internet and what it can do for society and what makes you despair?
[Guest]: Most of it makes me despair, right?
[Guest]: Is anything let's move on to the slightly more hopeful part there
[Guest]: So there are parts which work and these are almost always the parts which involve
[Guest]: Curation and effort. So one of the subreddits which works really well
[Guest]: Is change my view?
[Guest]: and change my view is a very neat subreddit because
[Guest]: They have a bunch of rules and they have a very constrained
[Guest]: Format and the format is that you must ask a question
[Guest]: You must state your view and you must want and be relatively genuine in wanting that view changed
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: The first response in general has to be someone making a serious stab at attempting to change your view
[Guest]: this is sort of the part where
[Guest]: This is what remains of what our hope for the internet was
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: Instead of being this really large place where everyone gets together and meets and shares idea. It's become this very large set of
[Guest]: Fragile eggshells where people go inside and they stay there and look outside and look at other people and abuse and say everyone
[Guest]: Who's inside that egg is horrible
[Guest]: Change my view is this place where people the few people who actually have an open mind or actually may be willing to have their
[Guest]: Minds changed
[Guest]: Show up and they say okay
[Guest]: Okay, I am in a position in my life where I am thinking about this thing
[Guest]: Give me a way to change my attitude or change my thing and that's the place where I see
[Amit Varma]: What remains of what we actually intended or hoped the internet would be is there a correlation between on the one hand the level?
[Amit Varma]: and quality of curation
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand the popularity
[Guest]: well, if you say quality of curation and popularity for sure because um
[Guest]: It's very
[Guest]: If you have a good topic and you have a way to say that this is how we're going to curate for it
[Guest]: Quite often you'll have decent amounts of popularity
[Guest]: So yes in a way they are related
[Guest]: But then you can also be a very good curator on a very boring topic and no one will come there and also that's within reddit
[Amit Varma]: Reddit already is a self-selected community of people who have come there and registered because they want to interact and they want to engage
[Amit Varma]: while people on facebook and twitter and so on are just passive consumers or whatever is being fed to them and
[Amit Varma]: Often in very manipulative ways like you pointed out correctly
[Amit Varma]: um
[Amit Varma]: And and and the facebooks and twitters of the world are way larger than even
[Guest]: Reddit so reddit is not on the radar for a majority of people right
[Guest]: It shows and frankly reddit has a is notorious
[Guest]: It quite often shows up for all the wrong reasons, which is another reason why a lot of people want to have
[Guest]: Restrictions on free speech there used to be old subreddits like jailbait
[Guest]: Which literally had pictures of people of well, well, let's just say borderline
[Guest]: images of young people which were borderline pedophilia that all
[Guest]: Went down in a bundle of flames eventually when people said this is not okay, but that's the sort of side of free speech
[Amit Varma]: And so in fact that thought comes to my mind that i'm not hinting at something about you here
[Amit Varma]: But isn't being a reddit moderator the perfect job for someone who likes child porn because they'll get to see a lot of it
[Amit Varma]: Even if they have to delete it, they'll get to see it
[Guest]: no, fortunately reddit, uh at this point of time and
[Guest]: generally because of its attitude of consolidating information
[Guest]: has
[Guest]: managed to
[Guest]: Always keep people in silos. So unless you were interested in that you would not find it in the first place
[Amit Varma]: Excellent. I'll just I was just pulling your leg
[Amit Varma]: Uh, thank you. Thanks a lot for this conversation. I've you've given me a lot of things to think about
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully curators like you can keep making a difference in our world. Thank you very much for having me
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode do go over to seen unseen.in
[Amit Varma]: To browse all our past episodes and if you have any of the problems nikhil spoke about like obesity or you eat too much junk food
[Amit Varma]: Go to the keto subreddit. It'll solve all your problems. Thank you for listening
[Unknown]: As you can see we have a podcast listener in his natural habitat
[Unknown]: Billions of years of evolution have led him to this point
[Unknown]: He's on his way to work and listening to podcasts makes his miserable day better
[Unknown]: He will now head to work and use all his knowledge to communicate with other colleagues and possibly future mates
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcasts.com
[Unknown]: Your one-stop destination where you can check out all the coolest indian podcasts. Happy listening